What Are Allergies?
Allergies are when your immune system overreacts to something called an allergen. An allergen is a foreign substance that's not harmful to most people, such as pollen or pet dander (skin cells from animals with fur or feathers). But when you have allergies, your immune system tries to fight it off as it would a germ or virus.


Sneezing, watery eyes, and a stuffy or runny nose are common symptoms of seasonal allergies. (Photo Credit: Getty Images)

When this happens, your body makes a protein called an antibody to fight the allergen. This leads to symptoms, such as sneezing, itching, hives, and shortness of breath. These symptoms are usually mild. But allergies can sometimes cause a serious reaction called anaphylaxis (pronounced a-nuh-fuh-lak-suhs), which is potentially life-threatening.

When is allergy season?

In many places in the U.S., there are two allergy seasons: spring and fall. Allergies that you get at similar times each year (seasonal allergies) are usually caused by pollen from trees, grasses, and weeds. Most trees release pollen in the spring, followed by grasses in late spring and early summer, and weeds follow in late summer and early fall.

Sometimes, seasonal allergies overlap, especially when trees release their pollen early or when a rainy spring causes more plants and molds to grow. So you may have one long allergy season in a year, depending on where you live, what plants grow near you, and what triggers your allergies.


What is an allergen?

An allergen is a substance that triggers an allergic reaction. The most common allergens include:

Dust
Cockroaches
Pet dander, as well as pet fur, pee, and spit
Mold
Pollen
Some foods, especially milk, eggs, wheat, soy, peanuts, tree nuts, and shellfish
Bug venom, especially from bees, yellow jackets, wasps, hornets, and fire ants
Latex
Some medications, particularly antibiotics including penicillin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen and naproxen

Allergy Causes
When you come into contact with an allergen, your immune system creates an antibody. The antibody serves as a tag that your immune system attaches to things it sees as dangerous. 

When you come across that allergen again, your immune system takes action. The antibodies recognize it, and turn on mast cells. Mast cells are like watchers that live in your skin, nose, eyes, and digestive system. They let your immune system know when you've been invaded by foreign substances such as viruses and bacteria.

RELATED:
Avoiding EoE Complications: What You Need to Know

The mast cells then release chemicals, such as histamine s, cytokines, and leukotrienes, that cause your allergy symptoms.

Your symptoms will depend on how much of the antigen you came in contact with and where it entered your body. For instance, if you breathe it in, you may have an itchy, runny, or stuffy nose and you may wheeze and cough. If it comes in through your eyes, you may have itchy, red, and watery eyes. If it enters through your skin, you may have a rash. 

If the allergen enters your body through a food you ate or a medicine you took, you may vomit or have diarrhea, and you may also be at a higher risk of anaphylaxis. Certain foods, such as peanuts, tree nuts, and shellfish, are more likely to cause anaphylaxis.

Allergy Types
Skin allergy

Skin allergies are triggered by allergens, such as:

Latex
Pet dander
Poison ivy
Plant pollen
Sunlight
Water
Food
Bug venom or poop
Animal allergy

If you are allergic to animals, it is usually caused by proteins that animals make in their fur, skin, pee, and spit.

Insect allergy

Insect allergies can come from cockroaches or bug venom. Proteins in the poop, spit, or body parts of cockroaches can be allergens. So can proteins in venom from the stings of bugs such as honeybees, yellow jackets, hornets, wasps, and fire ants.


Dust allergy

Dust allergy can be caused by a number of allergens that make up house dust. These allergens include:

Dust mites, a very common indoor allergen
Cockroaches
Mold
Pollen
Pet fur, feathers, and dander
Seasonal allergy

Spring allergies are often caused by tree pollen. Many different trees make pollen that can cause allergy symptoms.

Summer allergies are often caused by grass pollen. Most grasses don't cause allergy symptoms, but some common grass pollens that can trigger allergies include:

Bahia
Bermuda
Fescue
Johnson
Kentucky blue
Timothy
Fall allergies are usually caused by ragweed pollen. Ragweed is a wild plant that grows everywhere in the U.S., especially in the Midwest and on the East Coast. Other plant pollens that may trigger fall allergies include:

Burning bush
Cocklebur
Lamb's-quarters
Mugwort
Pigweed
Russian thistle
Sagebrush
Tumbleweed
RELATED:
5 Ways to Relieve Sinus Pain

 Food allergy

About 4%-6% of kids and 4% of adults have some form of food allergy. Any food can cause a reaction, but most food allergies are caused by nine types of food:

Eggs
Milk and dairy
Peanuts
Tree nuts, such as almonds, cashews, walnuts, and pine nuts
Fish
Shellfish, such as crab, lobster, and shrimp
Wheat
Soy
Sesame (including tahini)
Wheat (gluten) allergy is also common in children, but most (about 65%) of the kids outgrow it by the time they're 12.

You might hear about alcohol allergy, but this term is a bit misleading. Alcohol intolerance is a genetic condition in which your body can't break down alcohol very well. It's not really an allergy. Some people may have an allergic reaction to the grains (such as corn, wheat, or rye) used to make the alcohol. Others may have an intolerance to chemicals or preservatives, such as a type of wine preservative called sulfites.

Drug allergy

Drug allergies are usually caused by:

Penicillin and related antibiotics (this is the most common drug allergy)
Sulfonamide antibiotics (also called sulfa drugs)
Anticonvulsants
NSAIDS such as aspirin and ibuprofen
Chemotherapy drugs
Allergy Risk Factors
You may be more likely to have allergies if:

Anyone in your family has asthma, allergies, or eczema
You have asthma or eczema
You're a child
You may also be more likely to develop a new allergy if you are exposed to an allergen right after you've been sick or during pregnancy.


Allergy Symptoms
No matter what you're allergic to, the symptoms can be similar. Here's a breakdown of common symptoms by allergy type.

Common symptoms of skin allergies include:

Rash
Itch
Redness
Swelling
Bumps
Flaky skin
Cracked skin
Animal allergies cause symptoms such as:

Runny or stuffy nose
Face pain due to a stuffy nose
Sneezing
Watery, red, and itchy eyes
Cough, chest tightness, shortness of breath, and wheezing
Skin rash or hives
Bug allergy

Symptoms of cockroach allergy include:

Coughing or wheezing
Stuffy nose
Sinus infection
Ear infection
Skin rash
Symptoms that you're allergic to a bug's sting include:

Hives, itching, and swelling in places other than the sting site
Stomach cramps, vomiting, or severe nausea or diarrhea
Tightness in your chest or trouble breathing
Hoarse voice, swelling of your tongue or throat, or difficulty swallowing
RELATED:
5 Things to Avoid if Someone in Your House Is Sick

Dust allergy symptoms include:

Sneezing
Runny or stuffy nose
Red, itchy, and watery eyes
Itchy skin
Wheezing, coughing, shortness of breath
Food allergysymptoms

These symptoms may affect any part of your body, including your skin, digestive system, heart, blood vessels, or lungs. You may get one or more of the following:

Vomiting, stomach cramps
Hives
Shortness of breath
Wheezing
Repeated cough
Hoarse voice, tight throat, trouble swallowing
Swelling of the tongue (affecting your ability to talk or breathe)
Pale or blue-colored skin
Dizziness or feeling faint
Weak pulse
Symptoms of shock, like heart palpitations or agitation
Anaphylaxis, the symptoms of which can include rash, vomiting, trouble breathing, and dizziness
Most food allergy symptoms show up within 2 hours of eating and sometimes start within minutes. In rare cases, symptoms may begin after 4-6 hours, usually in kids who get eczema as a symptom.

One very serious food allergy is called food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES). This is rare, and it mostly happens in babies who try cow's milk, soy, or some grains for the first time. Within 2-6 hours, they can have repeated vomiting and sometimes bloody diarrhea. Babies can get dehydrated fast, so this is an emergency. They need to go to the ER for IV fluids and other medicines.

Drug allergysymptoms


Drug reactions can occur in any part of your body. You may be able to take a drug a couple of times with no reaction. Symptoms include:

Skin rash or hives
Itching
Wheezing or breathing problems
Swelling 
Vomiting
Feeling dizzy or light-headed
Anaphylaxis
Allergy Symptoms in Kids
Allergic reactions can happen anywhere in your child's body. Whatever their age, allergic reactions may cause the following symptoms:

Stuffy and/or runny nose
Sneezing
Itchy nose
Itching in their ears or the roof of their mouth
Red, itchy, watery eyes
Red, itchy, dry skin
Hives or itchy welts on the skin
Rash
Asthma symptoms, such as shortness of breath, wheezing, or coughing
Anaphylaxis
Allergy Symptoms Severity
Mild allergy symptoms

These include:

Rash
Itching in one area of your body
Congestion
RELATED:
Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria: Spot the Triggers

Mild allergic reactions don't spread to other parts of your body.

Moderate allergy symptoms

Moderate allergic reactions include symptoms that spread to other parts of your body, including:

Widespread itching, swelling, or hives
Difficulty breathing, tightness in your throat, or hoarse voice
Nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain
Anaphylaxis

Anaphylaxis is sudden and usually involves more than one part of your body. For instance, you may have both hives and swelling of your lips or tongue. It's more likely with food, drug, or bug sting allergies. It's possible to develop a severe allergic reaction to something you only had a mild reaction to before.


These symptoms can go from mild to serious within minutes. Serious symptoms include:

Skin rashes, itching, or hives
Swelling of the mouth, throat, and tongue that can make it hard to breathe or swallow
Shortness of breath, trouble breathing, wheezing
Stomach pain, bloating, vomiting, or diarrhea
Uterine cramps
Mental confusion
Dizziness or fainting
Feeling like something awful is about to happen
 

When to See a Doctor
If you're having a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis), you need emergency medical help. If you have an epinephrine auto-injector pen, give yourself a shot right away and call 911. Tell the dispatcher that you've taken epinephrine for an allergic reaction. Even if that helps you feel better, you need to see a doctor immediately. Sometimes, the reaction will happen again and you'll need more epinephrine or other treatments.

If you've had a serious allergy attack or anysymptoms of anaphylaxis in the past, make an appointment with your doctor. You need long-term help managing your condition, including a prescription for an epinephrine auto-injector that you'll carry with you at all times. You may also want to see an allergist (a doctor who specializes in allergies) or immunologist (who specializes in immune system issues).

If you have symptoms you think are caused by an allergy and over-the-counter (OTC) medicines don't help, see your doctor. If you have any symptoms after starting a new medicine, immediately call the doctor who prescribed it.

RELATED:
The Elbow Trick & More Things to Teach Kids About Colds

Allergy Diagnosis
If your allergy symptoms don't respond to OTC medications, or if you think you might have a food allergy, you'll need to visit an allergist. To diagnose allergies, your allergist will likely:

Ask about your health and whether you have family members with asthma or allergies

Ask about your symptoms

Do a physical exam

Run allergy tests

Allergy tests

Skin tests. The most common way to test for allergies is a skin test. That's because it gives the fastest, most accurate results.


Some medicines can get in the way of the tests. Ask your doctor whether you need to stop taking any medication before the test.

The test that allergists use most often is called a skin prick test. A doctor or nurse will put a tiny drop of an allergen on your skin, usually on the inside of your arm or on your back. 

Next, they'll prick your skin or make a small scratch on the surface through the drop to let the allergen get underneath. The skin prick won't make you bleed. You'll feel it, but it shouldn't hurt.

The doctor will probably test several allergens at the same time. If one of the areas swells up, itches, or gets red like a mosquito bite, it means you're sensitive to that allergen. It usually takes about 15 minutes to find out.

Some doctors use a small needle to put the allergen under the first few layers of your skin. This is called an intradermal skin test. Your doctor may use this test if your skin prick test is negative but they haven't ruled out allergies. They may also do it if they think you have a drug or bug venom allergy.

When the test is over, the doctor or nurse will clean your skin and put some cream on it to help with any itching. Any swelling from a reaction usually goes away within 30 minutes to a few hours.

Blood tests.If you take any medicines that could affect allergy test results, have sensitive skin, or have had a bad reaction to a skin test, your doctor might do a blood test instead. They may also test kids using a blood test.

RELATED:
Why Do You Feel Sick After a Flu Shot?

During the test, a sample of your blood is sent to a lab, and the lab adds the allergen or allergens to your blood sample. They then measure the amount of antibodies your blood makes against the allergen. This is usually more expensive than a skin test, and it's also less accurate.

Food allergy testing. If your doctor thinks you might be allergic to a certain food or foods, they may ask you to stop eating them to see if that helps. This is called an elimination diet.

You'll cut out those foods for 2-4 weeks and see if you have any allergy symptoms during that time. If not, you'll start eating the foods again to see if your symptoms come back. If they do, there's a good chance you're allergic to those foods.

Your doctor also might ask you to do something called an oral food challenge. This should only be done in a medical office by an allergist.

Your doctor will give you very small amounts of the food you may be allergic to and watch for symptoms. If you don't have any, they'll slowly give you larger doses. If you start to have symptoms, they'll stop the test.


The most common signs are hives or a flushed feeling. If that happens, they'll give you medicine to make you feel better. If you don't have a reaction, your doctor will rule out an allergy to that food.

Allergy Treatment
Immunotherapy

Immunotherapy is a treatment to prevent allergic reactions. There are two kinds: allergy shots and sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT). During immunotherapy, your doctor gives you a small amount of an allergen you react to. They slowly increase the amount you get until you become less sensitive to it. This reduces your symptoms when you come across that allergen again.

Allergy shots (subcutaneous immunotherapy or SCIT). Allergy shots are the most common form of immunotherapy doctors prescribe, and they work best. They can change your immune system and prevent you from getting new allergies and developing asthma. Shots are fairly safe. But there's a small chance you can have a reaction to them, so your doctor will watch you in their office after you get one.

RELATED:
Can Dietary Changes Help With EoE?

Shots work well for allergies to plants, mold, house dust, animal dander, and bug stings. However, shots don't seem to work as well for allergies to food, medicines, or feathers. They may not help if you get hives or eczema. You usually get allergy shots once a week for about 7 months, then once every 2 weeks. Eventually, you'll only need one every 4 weeks. The entire process may take 3-5 years.

Sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT). SLIT doesn't use injections. Instead, your doctor gives you small doses of an allergen in a tablet under your tongue. The tablets dissolve for 1-2 minutes and then you swallow. You may need to take them every day, or you may take them every 3 days or so. For lasting effect, you may need treatment for 3-5 years.

Tablets are available for dust mites, grass, and ragweed. SLIT may help kids who have eczema because of allergies. Researchers are also studying SLIT as a possible treatment for food allergies, but this research is in an early stage. One medicine, peanut allergen extract (Palforzia), is available in the U.S. to treat peanut allergies.

Allergy medicine

Several types of medications can help relieve the symptoms of allergies.

Steroids. Steroids, known medically as corticosteroids, can reduce swelling and redness from allergies. 

They prevent and treat nasal stuffiness, sneezing, and itchy, runny nose due to seasonal or year-round allergies. They can also decrease inflammation and swelling from other types of allergic reactions.


Steroids are available in various forms:

As pills or liquids for serious allergies or asthma
Locally acting inhalers for asthma
Locally acting nasal sprays for seasonal or year-round allergies
Creams for skin allergies
Eye drops for allergic conjunctivitis
In addition to steroid medications, your doctor may prescribe additional types of medications to help combat your allergic symptoms.

Steroids work well, but you must take them regularly, often daily—even when you don't have symptoms. It may take 1-2 weeks of regular use before you notice the full effect.

Examples of steroids:

Prescription nasal steroids: beclomethasone (Qnasl, Qvar RediHaler), budesonide (Pulmicort Flexhaler), ciclesonide (Alvesco, Omnaris, Zetonna), fluticasone furoate (Flovent, Veramyst), and mometasone (Asmanex Twisthaler)
OTC nose sprays or mists
Steroid eye drops: fluorometholone (Flarex, FML), prednisolone, and loteprednol ophthalmic (Alrex, Lotemax)
Oral steroids: prednisolone, prednisone, methylprednisolone (Medrol)
Skin creams: betamethasone, desonide (desonate, DesOwen), hydrocortisone, mometasone (Elocon), and triamcinolone
RELATED:
5 Ways to Relieve Sinus Pain

Antihistamines. Antihistamines have been used for years to treat allergy symptoms. They block histamine, which causes redness, swelling, and itching.

You can take them as pills, liquids, nasal sprays, or eye drops. OTC antihistamine eye drops can relieve red itchy eyes, while nasal sprays can be used to treat symptoms of seasonal or year-round allergies.

Some antihistamines can make you drowsy. Take care if you take these and need to drive or do other activities where you need to be alert. Other options, such as “nondrowsy” OTC decongestant pills, are less likely to have this effect.

You can take antihistamines as:

Pills, available in either OTC or prescription strengths
OTC liquids
Prescription nose sprays: azelastine (Astelin, Astepro), olopatadine (Patanase)
Eye drops, available OTC as well as prescription options such as ketotifen (Alaway, Zaditor) and olopatadine (Pataday, Patanol, Pazeo)
Decongestants. Decongestants relieve a stuffy nose and are often prescribed along with antihistamines for allergies. They work by shrinking your swollen nasal tissues and blood vessels. This temporarily relieves symptoms such as congestion, runny nose, and redness. Doctors don't recommend these for people with high blood pressure, heart disease, glaucoma, or hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid).

Decongestants can come as nose sprays, eye drops, liquids, and pills.


You should use nose spray and eye drop decongestants for only a few days at a time because long-term use can make your symptoms worse. Pills and liquid decongestants can safely be taken longer.

Many are available without a prescription. You can buy them as:

Pills
Liquids
Nose sprays
Eye drops
Mast cell stabilizers. Mast cell stabilizers treat mild to moderate inflammation. They prevent the release of histamine from mast cells, which make and store this substance. Some of these drugs also have anti-inflammatory effects, but they don't usually work as well as steroids. Your doctor may prescribe them when antihistamines don't work or give you unacceptable side effects.

As with many drugs, it may take several weeks before you feel the full effects.

Mast cell stabilizers include:

OTC nose sprays: cromolyn
Prescription eye drops: cromolyn (Crolom), lodoxamide (Alomide), nedocromil (Alocril)
RELATED:
How a Flu Virus Travels Through Your Body

Leukotriene modifiers. Leukotriene modifiers treat asthma and nasal allergy symptoms. They block the effects of leukotrienes, chemicals your body produces in response to an allergen. They can be prescribed along with other drugs.

They're available only with a prescription and come as pills, chewable tablets, and oral granules.

The only leukotriene modifier that has FDA approval to treat nasal allergies is montelukast (Singulair). Zafirlukast (Accolate) and zileuton (Zyflo) are also FDA-approved to treat asthma.

Combination allergy drugs. Some allergy drugs contain both an antihistamine and a decongestant to relieve multiple allergy symptoms. Other drugs have several effects aside from blocking the effects of histamine, such as preventing mast cells from releasing other allergy-inducing chemicals.

Examples of combination allergy medicines:

OTC pills and liquids: cetirizine and pseudoephedrine, fexofenadine and pseudoephedrine, diphenhydramine and pseudoephedrine, loratadine and pseudoephedrine, and pseudoephedrine/triprolidine (for nasal allergies)
Prescription pills and liquids: acrivastine and pseudoephedrine (Semprex-D)
Nose sprays: azelastine/fluticasone (Dymista) combines a decongestant and steroid for seasonal nasal allergies
Eye drops: naphazoline/pheniramine for redness and swelling

Anticholinergic nasal sprays. The drug ipratropium bromide (Atrovent) can help with a runny nose. It works by blocking a chemical called acetylcholine, which causes cells in your nose to make mucus.

Biologics. These medicines stop certain reactions in your immune system. You take these medicines as a shot, usually using an auto-injector. Your doctor may prescribe them when other medicines don't work. Some examples include:

Dupilumab (Dupixent): It treats moderate to severe eczema and nose polyps that result from long-term swelling in your nose. It also helps prevent serious asthma attacks.
Omalizumab (Xolair): It treats allergic asthma and nose polyps from long-term swelling in your nose.
Emergency epinephrine shots. Epinephrine shots are the most important treatment for a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis). You inject them with an auto-injector pen. You may need to carry two with you at all times if you've had any severe allergic reaction, but especially if you're allergic to foods or bug stings. Different brands work differently, so your doctor will train you on how to use your auto-injector. Make sure you replace your emergency epinephrine before the expiration date.

RELATED:
How Long Should You Stay Home With the Flu?

If you have a prescription for emergency epinephrine shots and think you're having an allergic reaction, use your shot immediately. Then call 911 and get to the ER right away. It's hard to tell how serious the reaction will be and you may need more than one shot to see an effect. You may also need other medicines to help your body get through the reaction.

Other OTC products that can help with symptoms include:

Saltwater solution, or saline, to rinse your sinuses and nose. This can relieve mild congestion, loosen mucus, and prevent crusting. They can soothe your nose and help with nosebleeds from blowing your nose a lot.
Neti pots. These look like little teapots. You use the spout to pour diluted salt water into your nose to flush out mucus and moisten the tissues in your sinuses. Don't use plain water because it can irritate your tissues. Always use sterile water to make the saltwater solution. Wash your neti pot well and dry it with a paper towel or let it air dry completely between uses.
Artificial tears. These can help relieve itchy, dry, watery, and red eyes.
Allergy Home Remedies
Some nondrug remedies that can help with symptoms include:

Saltwater solution, or saline. You can use this as a nasal spray to rinse out your sinuses and nose. It helps relieve mild congestion, loosen mucus, and prevent crusting. It can soothe your nose and help with nosebleeds you get from blowing your nose a lot.
Neti pots. These look like little teapots. You use the spout to pour diluted salt water into your nose to help flush out mucus and moisten the tissues in your sinuses. Don't use plain water, which can irritate your tissues. Always use distilled or sterile water to make the saltwater solution. After use, wash your neti pot well and dry it with a paper towel or let it air dry completely.
Artificial tears. These can help relieve itchy, dry, watery, and red eyes.

Allergy Complications
Having allergies increases your risk of developing these other medical problems:

Anaphylaxis. The worse your allergies, the higher your risk for this type of serious reaction.
Asthma. Another immune system reaction that makes it hard to breathe. If you have asthma, an allergic reaction can trigger an attack.
Sinusitis (inflammation of the tissues in your sinuses): It can result when your sinuses try to flush out allergens.
Ear or lung infections: These happen when tissues in those areas get inflamed and swell due to allergies.
RELATED:
8 Mistakes People Make When They're Getting Sick

Living With Allergies
Allergy prevention

In general, experts recommend that you:

Know what triggers your allergies and avoid these allergens as much as possible. An allergy journal or diary can help with this. In your diary, track what you do and what you eat, as well as when symptoms happen and what seems to help.
Take your medicines as prescribed.
If you have epinephrine auto-injectors, always keep them with you.
If you've ever had a severe allergic reaction, wear a medical alert bracelet or necklace.
Have an emergency action plan in case you have a severe allergic reaction.
 To help reduce the levels of allergens in your home:

Have a weekly cleaning routine that includes damp-mopping hard floors and vacuuming carpets. If you're the one with allergies, wear a dusk mask while you do this or have someone else do it. If possible, leave for a few hours afterward to avoid allergens you’ve stirred up. Use a vacuum cleaner with a small-particle or high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter. Use a damp cloth to clean surfaces where dust may settle, the tops of the doors and window frames.
Keep your house between 68 F and 72 F and keep the humidity at 50% or lower. Heat and humidity will make dust mites and mold worse. Clean or replace small-particle filters in your central heat and air systems at least once a month.
Remove dust-collecting items such as knickknacks, ornaments, books, and magazines. Store toys, games, and stuffed animals in plastic bins to keep them from getting dusty.
Control cockroaches and mice in your house with traps you buy from the hardware store or hire an exterminator. Thoroughly clean hard surfaces where cockroaches or mice may have been.
Close doors and windows during warm weather and allergy season and use an air conditioner and/or a humidifier to prevent mold. Check your roof and ceilings for leaks. Wash anything contaminated with mold with a 5% chlorine solution. Wear a mask.
Clean sheets, pillowcases, and blankets at least once a week with hot (at least 130 F) water. Use dust mite covers on pillows, mattresses, and box springs.
Don't let anyone smoke inside.
RELATED:
How to Tell the Difference Between a Cold and the Flu

What can I do to protect myself from outdoor allergens?

You don’t have to stay indoors round the clock. Take these precautions:

Avoid going out when allergens are at their peak, usually between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m.
Check the allergy forecast (download an allergy app or visit a weather website that tracks allergens). Stay indoors when pollen and mold counts are high or the wind is gusting, which could kick up dust and pollen.
Consider wearing a face mask to limit how much pollen you breathe in.
Wear a baseball cap during pollen season, and leave it at the door when you come inside.
Avoid tracking pollen in your home by leaving your shoes at the door, changing your clothes, and showering and washing your hair immediately after going inside. Pets can bring in pollen, too. So keep your cats or dogs out of the bedroom.
Wear sunglasses to protect your eyes from pollen.
Roll up the car windows and use the air conditioner when you drive.
Have someone else do the yard work.