Hepatitis C is a sneaky virus. You may not have any symptoms at all. Most people don’t. This is one of the reasons, along with treatability now, that all adults are recommended to get tested. Your doctor could check your liver and see only a little damage. You're usually not diagnosed until they spot a problem with your liver enzymes after a routine blood test.

Early Signs and Symptoms of Acute Hepatitis C
The disease is called acute hepatitis C when you first get it. The symptoms are similar to those of the flu, but you might not have symptoms at all. If you do, they may include:

Belly pain
Clay-colored poop
Dark urine
Fatigue
Fever
Jaundice (yellow tint to your skin or eyes)
Joint pain
Poor appetite
Nausea
Vomiting
Symptoms usually show up between 2 and 12 weeks after exposure to the virus.

Chronic Hepatitis C Symptoms
If you don’t get diagnosed and treated, you could have the disease for years and not know it. Doctors call this the chronic form, because it lasts a long time. Some people who've had it for a while get scarring of the liver, which is called cirrhosis. or liver cancer.

In addition to the above symptoms, signs that your liver isn’t working the way it should include:

Ascites -- fluid buildup in your belly
Easy bleeding
Easy bruising
Hepatic encephalopathy -- confusion, drowsiness, and slurred speech
Jaundice of the skin
Hives or rashes
Itchy skin
Spider angiomas -- spidery blood vessels under your skin
Swollen legs
Weight loss
 


Symptoms of Cirrhosis From Untreated Hepatitis C
You could get scarring of the liver, called cirrhosis, after you’ve had hepatitis C for 20 or 30 years. If you have it, you might:

Retain water
Bleed and bruise easily
Notice skin and eyes turning yellow with jaundice
 

Does Hep C Always Become Chronic?
No. Doctors aren’t sure how it works, but between 15% and 25% of adults who have it clear the virus from their bodies without treatment. You might hear this called spontaneous clearance.


When to See the Doctor
If you have symptoms of hepatitis C or think you may have been exposed to the virus, make an appointment to be tested.

All adults are recommended to get screened.